Once that I had thrown out of school, or he had flunked out, and he was readmitted a year later.
And he came to me and said that was the best thing that had ever happened to him.
I mean, he thanked me because he had shaped up.
And that was why he shaped up.
Now, I don't recall.
We did a couple other things that we tried to do.
I tried to start a summer.
I was interested in trying to bring more minorities into the college.
And I ran a program one summer, I called it, what was it?
Learn, work and learn or something.
Earn and learn.
And these, the participants in this program were to come to campus for a period of something like six or eight weeks and work with a professor.
in the college.
And they were all, they were black.
All of them were black.
And the funding came.
We paid them $2,000 a month.
Now, these are undergraduates?
These are, well, these were undergraduates at other schools.
I recruited, I've forgotten where they were coming from.
They were all, we were trying to recruit them
They must have been out of high school, because we were trying to get them to think about graduate programs.
They were juniors in college.
We had funds for five of them.
The funding came from petroleum companies.
And so I had these five very bright, two women, I think, three men around.
We assigned them to work with professors.
Now, the problem with that is that you have to have a dedicated professor that's willing to spend the time.
That's what I found.
And I saw that they got a trip to NASA, and I took them to visit a petroleum company in Houston, and we had a whole program for them.
And I hoped that out of this, maybe one or two might even consider doing graduate studies.
None of them did.
But one young man, I've forgotten where I met him, somewhere on campus, he had come to an event on campus, he went to Rice and Engineering, you see.
And he had remembered me with pleasure, and he came up and told me what he was doing.
But I didn't follow up, you know, that program might have, this was when it was very hard before we had any blacks on campus.
And this was the start of an attempt to get them into geosciences.
It's very difficult in geosciences to attract minority students that have the math physics background.
That's what we found with, maybe it's changing now, but certainly when you went through the list of SAT scores and ACT scores, there were a few
Blacks and Hispanics that really would have had the ability to handle the math physics unless they had come and spent a year in remediation.
And you can't invite them to do that.
And I'm assuming also that you would, if we could have checked on their high school backgrounds, that there were not many youngsters from small town high schools that would have had limited math and science offerings.
Amen.
Let's see.
See if you agree with this theory that I've heard others share.
that one of the reasons why it is difficult to recruit American nationals into the graduate programs in science and technology is that the outstanding undergraduate degree recipients get captured quickly with real fine salaries by American corporations.
And so rather than go get a PhD, they get a big salary for a corporation.
and we scholars then award our assistantships and fellowships quite often to international students who are not as likely to get that job right out of undergraduate school.
Is that?
I suspect there's some truth to that.
I certainly know that in geophysics,
When most of our undergraduates were, I mean, it was like buying a football team with scholarship money, that those kids, so many of them, rarely did they ever go on to graduate school, not because the industry was snapping them up.
And that was true in geophysics.
And in Texas, of course, the petroleum companies, the employment goes with the industry, up and down.
But when geophysicists are needed, they're paid very well.
Now, did the job market for the students in geophysics and specifically, but in geosciences in general,
Did the job market tend to go along with oil prices up and down?
Oh, yeah.
Now, the other thing that was interesting in the college is the reluctance of many of our science faculty to consider geography as really belonging in the college.
And, you know, I had a different view.
I had a view that they were a leavening influence on the college.
And in their own right, they're scholars.
But there certainly were some faculty that were unhappy when resources, when they saw enrollment in geography was booming.
And the undergraduate coursework available in geography was extensive.
And in fact,
Perhaps the only reason that we could justify ourselves in terms of student credit hours was, geography was a live department, and geology, the first, the undergraduate geology two semesters brought in a lot of student credit hours.
Now, I happen to be of the view, unfortunately, a state university seldom has that flexibility.
But I believe that there are many disciplines that enrich a campus that are never going to have large numbers of students.
And in fact, when I was at Brown, they started the Department of Egyptology.
The major professor was a mathematician, Nugabar, whose interest was in kideiform mathematics, if you will, and so forth.
Well, I think these things enrich a university.
but there's no room for them in an A&M.
I think that's sad.
Yes, yes.
And geophysics has always been borderline in terms of enrollment.
When we had scholarship funds, we could make the enrollment.
I think that's one reason that they reunited the two departments.
When you, during your dean years,
What were the other tough courses that a typical geosciences major dreaded
other than math?
What were they?
Well, they all took the chemistry 101, 102, and physics 218, 219.
I mean, those were required.
And those were the tough ones.
Those are the freshman basic courses.
And in math, they were required to take up through differential equations.
That was true of geology, geophysics, meteorology.
Now, oceanography didn't have an undergraduate curriculum.
During those years, again, not going to ask the negative, who are the teachers, using that word deliberately, who are the teachers
both within the College of Geosciences and outside, that you feel they earned their reputation for doing their instruction well?
Who are the teachers that deserve a pat on the back?
When I first got to A&M, Trav Parker was certainly an excellent teacher.
In geology?
In geology.
Boy, that's a tough one to start picking.
In my department, I think in many ways, Tony Ganji probably was the best teacher, but you had to be able to stand up.
He could be
at times, his own quite demanding.
But he certainly gave the students a great deal.
Bill, the former dean of faculties before Janice Stout.
Oh, oh, oh.
In math.
In math, yeah.
You bet.
You're asking me who had a good reputation.
Right.
I've forgotten what it is.
Here, I can't recall it either right now.
Bill Perry.
Yes.
Sure.
Splendid teacher.
I mean, that comes to mind immediately.
In geography, I mean...
Every teacher in that department had some particular virtue of one sort or another, but it was an interesting collection of people.
Chemistry, physics, biology?
I can't single anyone out.
Probably if I went down a list of faculty names, I could pick out somebody from chemistry.
Who were the great researchers that we haven't mentioned yet in geosciences?
Okay.
Well, we've mentioned the Handen Group.
I certainly feel that.
Bob Reed.
Syed L. Syed.
Not so much as a researcher as a global science researcher.
a person able to integrate globally in several people in oceanography.
I think when I first came here, Bill Sackett,
was one of those people.
Worth Nowlin, certainly, and now the head of the meteorology department.
Gordon Eaton, but he wasn't able to do research here.
In my home department of geophysics, Terry Spencer's had a productive time, but I wouldn't say that he shook down any great walls.
Neville Carter, certainly I would have put among the first rate.
And when I say this, these people are not always successful in getting funding, and yet in their fields, they're understood to be outstanding.
Bob Berg.
Forget about Bob.
I shouldn't forget about Bob Berg.
He's a National Society of Engineers.
Were there any big grants, big research accomplishments that really were, look back, that were really steps up?
The ocean drilling project.
Okay.
Bringing the ocean drilling project.
Who deserves credit for that?
for getting it here?
I think Phil Rabinowitz, he was, he had come to A&M in the oceanography department.
Certainly, he was one.
I'm sure that some of the administrators probably, I don't know when they came here when Gordon Eaton was dean or whether it was before that.
But Bob Reed, the people on oceanography were the people that drove that.
Describe in general, what did the ocean drilling program include?
What did it do?
Okay.
You have to know what the ocean drilling program was doing before it came to A&M.
The program was set up to drill the ocean basin.
Number one, to look for evidence of the sea floor spreading hypothesis or paradigm.
It had been managed by Scripps in La Jolla, and it had a worldwide
One of the things is that it brings participation in through the global community.
And it had this reputation, except Scripps didn't do a very good job of servicing it.
And all I can remember now is I was involved in one or two of the early talks, but then I think a committee was set up, Steve, well,
He's a paleontologist in oceanography.
Steve Gartner was involved, and I know Phil, I'm sure, Worthen Allen, and Bill Merrill.
Bill Merrill, probably.
Bill Merrill was probably one of the biggies.
In helping bring it?
In helping bring it.
Bill was very savvy, as you're probably aware, also very ambitious, I think.
Did we have some other major competitors?
Well, the meeting to establish the renewal for the next five years, Scripps was certainly hoped to repeat and expected to repeat.
Now, I don't know who else, whether anybody else made a proposal
But I think the committee, I think they were shook up when A&M came forth with a very substantial proposal.
But of course, one of the things is the board promised to build the core facilities or something.
A&M guaranteed the equivalent of three or four million dollars.
Our Board of Regents.
And that's something that you would have to talk with somebody else about to see how it actually came about.
But that was the first time, to my knowledge, that A&M had acquired a national
project of major size.
And that brought in something like $40 million a year.
And it has been renewed.
And it clearly put us in the major league with Scripps, Lamont, and so forth.
Now, whether we've taken advantage of that, I don't think we have.
Now, one thing it has done, it brought a continual
stream of Earth scientists from all over the world to A&M.
You can perhaps remember how hard it might have been in 1963 to bring a scholar to A&M to talk.
I mean, they go through Houston and Dallas.
No way you could get them to come to
I can remember the first couple of years, the American Geophysical Union, I think, or was it GSA, had a program where they brought international scholars to this country for tours.
And I was instrumental in applying for one of these grants in person.
The individual that came was the survey director in Israel.
And I had met him at a meeting in Monaco.
And he was tremendous.
He gave three lectures.
But those first few years, I was the only one trying to do something like this.
And it was like fighting uphill.
Now, when Ocean Drilling first got here, the facility was the
The new quarters are already ready for them.
Where were they housed when they first arrived?
Well, I don't remember.
I don't remember where the office, it must have been in oceanography that they had an office.
Before we took over, certainly we had to have the core facilities built in the major building, and maybe that building was already under construction out at the research park.
Because that's where they're housed now.
Yes, right.
So it may well be that that building already existed.
Now, if someone nationally were looking at us in geosciences today and trying to rank us, compare us, at what level would they put us?
Well, probably the second ten.
I mean, I don't think we quite made, you know, we always, in geophysics, we always hoped that we would make it to the Wisconsin level.
We thought Wisconsin was,
I don't think we ever did quite got there.
And I think we've backslid since then.
Who else in the Southwest would be comparable to us or vice versa?
UT has a good, strong earth science program.
And of course, they also have the state survey and the library is there.
So they are a strong competitor, and they have a research group at Balcones.
Art Maxwell was the director for many years that were doing marine geophysical things.
In fact, I did some work with Joel Watkins now in our department, was part of the group in Galveston.
If you recall, maybe UT set up a laboratory in Galveston.
Maurice Ewing, when he had to retire from Le Mans, wouldn't retire.
He came to UT and started that marine group, and they had a facility in Galveston.
They were doing multi-channel seismic work in the Gulf.
And that was the start of a fairly strong, stronger program than we had in that kind of geophysics.
Now, if we went, say, five, six hundred mile radius,
Going east, there's no one until we get, does Georgia Tech have anything of our quality?
No.
We'd go all the way to the mid-Atlantic coast?
Let's see, where would we go?
You know, there are a little bright spikes here and there, but for example, Oklahoma has a fairly strong, it's a geology group, I would think.
But in terms of oceanography, the schools we would be competing with at the moment would be the University of Rhode Island, Delaware.
We're not able to compete with Woods Hole or Scripps as much as we might like to.
I mean, you sort of have to think.
There are not too many schools that combine all those disciplines in, say, one college.
Let's see.
We talked about best teachers.
Oh, humor.
When you and I arrived, there were some old-time faculty members that had nicknames.
Do you remember any of the nicknames in geology or any of the other disciplines over your way?
No.
I don't think there were any nicknames in my department.
Not that I remember.
I've not heard of any, but I thought there might have been some in geography.
Let's see.
When I came, the only geographers were Ed Duran and Schleselman?
No, geology.
Oh, geology.
Oh, Schleselman was Skipper.
Oh, okay.
All right.
I don't know why, but he was Skipper Schleselman.
Oh, okay.
Well, I didn't know that.
And in geology, there was, you know, we've already mentioned Fred Smith and Carl Koenig.
I don't know whether they had any nicknames or not.
No, I don't know.
What about, do you remember any incidents either in your classroom, laboratory, or that you heard about of Aggie student pranks
Any good bull, any stunts, any jokes?
I'm sure there have been, but it doesn't come to mind.
Nobody ever tried this?
No, I can think of a non-joke.
I can remember walking into my office in Hal Booty the first or second year I was there and looking at my desk and it was all different colors of green and blue and whatever.
And directly overhead, third floor Halbooty, Chem Engineering still was in the building and they had a wet lab.
And it was dripping through the ceiling.
And something had come through?
Yes.
Yeah, right.
It wasn't an intended joke.
I know.
Oh, I know one.
Who were the key staff members, talking about office now, at the departmental or college level that deserve special note?
Oh, boy.
Okay.
Who were the folks that made... I'm trying to remember the secretary in geology, Mrs. Oh.
She deserved specials.
I can't remember now.
What about at the college level?
Oh, boy.
Well...
I'd have to think a lot.
I mean, there's nobody that immediately pops out.
Because in the college, we've had a lot of staff people, not just secretarial staff.
The Oceanography Department had a machine shop maintenance group of people.
And tectonophysics, Jack McGurk came with the Shell Group, and certainly
made their operation possible.
Gladys Byers, not related to Dean Byers, but Gladys Byers was secretary in geology when I came.
She then moved to another office on campus, but she was outstanding.
That's what I'm trying to remember.
Let's see.
Are there some topics that we have not yet gotten to we should have?
I'm trying to think.
As you look back in your own career, what were some of the proudest moments for you as a faculty and administrator, faculty member administrator at A&M?
What were some of the
Well, I guess I'm happy I survived.
At a personal level, you may be aware that my wife passed away after childbirth, and so I had five kids to raise, and I had to curtail my going to sea.
I look back and say, I'm not sure how I manage, but all my kids are...
are happily married and going in the right direction and so forth.
I feel that's a plus.
I think I certainly had the respect of my colleagues in the college when I was in the dean's office.
I happen to think that the best administration is the one you never hear about, that there's no hassle.
And probably there are a lot of students out there that recognize that, although I may never hear directly from them.
Yeah, and eventually I did...
Oh yeah, there's an amusing story.
After I've been here a couple of years, a couple of years I went off on AGU lecture tours.
I went to, one year I went to Baylor in Texas Tech, and I've forgotten where else, and I was lecturing on the current sea floor spreading or whatever.
I went up to Baylor, I had a small geology department, very cordial, I had a good time.
And, you know, I was proud of having the AGU lectureship.
But what was so funny is that the guest quarters at Baylor at that time were in the new women's dormitory.
And if you can recall in 1965, Aggies dated Baylor girls.
So here I am with a room in the Baylor
girls' dormitory.
I gave my lecture at 7.30 at night, and then after the lecture was over, there were no bars, but I go to some professor's home, and we have a few drinks, and we have a good time, and he takes me back to the dormitories.
take into account that in those days the dormitory closed at 10 o'clock or 10 30 so here i am at 11 30 at night slightly high pounding on the door to this dormitory trying to wake up the house mother who had a light i mean i could see a light back there and eventually i got back in
Now, the other interesting thing from that particular chore, amongst the other thing, I had a stipend of $300, which I bought an Accutron watch.
Do you remember the Accutrons?
I still have it.
They can't repair it.
When I went to sea on oceanographic cruises, that Accutron watch was better timed than the ship's chronometer.
It did not drift as much.
So, I still have that.
I ought to try and get it fixed sometime.
And then eventually I was given one of the former students awards.
For teaching, research, service?
No, for student service.